                          Homomorphic Encryption Standard

 Martin Albrecht, Melissa Chase, Hao Chen, Jintai Ding, Shafi Goldwasser, Sergey Gorbunov, Jeffrey
Hoffstein, Kristin Lauter, Satya Lokam, Daniele Micciancio, Dustin Moody, Travis Morrison, Amit Sahai,
                                         Vinod Vaikuntanathan

                                             March 12, 2018

We met as a group during the Homomorphic Encryption Standardization Workshop on July 13-14, 2017,
hosted at Microsoft Research in Redmond. Researchers from around the world represented a number of
different communities: government, industry, and academia. There are at least 6 research groups
around the world who have made libraries for general-purpose homomorphic encryption available
([SEAL], [HElib], [Palisade], [cuHE], [NFLLib], [HEAAN]) for applications and general-purpose use, and
demos were shown of all 6 libraries. [TFHE] is another library which was not demoed at the first
workshop. All 6 of these general-purpose libraries for homomorphic encryption were based on RLWE-
based systems (Ring Learning With Errors), and all libraries implemented one of two encryption schemes
described below in Section 3 (BGV or B/FV) and also displayed common choices for the underlying ring,
error distribution, and parameter selection.

Homomorphic Encryption is a breakthrough new technology which can enable private cloud storage and
computation solutions. Demos shown at the workshop included a SEAL demo of CryptoNets, which
performs efficient computation of image processing tasks such as hand-writing recognition on encrypted
data using neural nets. Many other applications are described in detail in the white paper by the
Applications group. In order for Homomorphic Encryption to be adopted in medical, health, and financial
sectors to protect data and patient and consumer privacy, it will have to be standardized, most likely by
multiple standardization bodies and government agencies. An important part of standardization is broad
agreement on security levels for varying parameter sets. Although extensive research and benchmarking
has been done in the research community to establish the foundations for this effort, it is hard to find all
the information in one place, along with concrete parameter recommendations for applications and
deployment.

This document is an attempt to capture the collective knowledge at the workshop regarding the
currently known state of security of these schemes, to specify the schemes, and to recommend a wide
selection of parameters to be used for homomorphic encryption at various security levels. We describe
known attacks and their estimated running times in order to make these parameter recommendations.
We also describe additional features of these encryption schemes which make them useful in different
applications and scenarios. Many sections of this document are intended for direct use as a first draft of
parts of the standard to be prepared by the Working Group formed at this workshop.
Outline of the document:

HES Section 1.0 standardizes the encryptions schemes to be used. Section 1.0 consists of:

        Section 1.0.1: introduces notation and definitions.
        Section 1.0.2: defines the security properties for homomorphic encryption.
        Section 1.0.3: describes the BGV and B/FV schemes.
        Section 1.0.4 describes alternative schemes: YASHE, NTRU/LTV, and GSW.
        Section 1.0.5 describes additional features of the schemes.

HES Section 2.0 recommends parameter choices to achieve security. Section 2.0 consists of:

        Section 2.0.1: describes the hard problems: the LWE and RLWE assumptions.
        Section 2.0.2: describes known attacks and their estimated running times.
        Section 2.0.3: recommends concrete parameters to achieve various security levels.

It is expected that future work to update and expand this Homomorphic Encryption Standard will use
the following numbering convention:
      • updates to the encryption schemes or additional schemes may be added as Sections 1.1, 1.2,…
      • updates to security level or recommended parameters may be added as Sections 2.1, 2.2,…
      • a new section to cover API design is planned to be added as Section 3.0, and updated as 3.1, …
      • a new section to cover applications may be added as Section 4.0, and updated as 4.1, …
                             Homomorphic Encryption Standard Section 1.0
                                 Recommended Encryption Schemes

Section 1.0.1 Notation and Definitions

•   ParamGen(𝜆, 𝑃, 𝐾, 𝐵) → Params

The parameter generation algorithm is used to instantiate various parameters used in the HE algorithms
outlined below. As input, it takes:
    • 𝜆 denotes the desired security level of the scheme. For instance, 128-bit security (𝜆 = 128) or
        256-bit security.
    • 𝑃 denotes the modulus of the plaintext numbers one wants to encrypt. For instance, 𝑃 = 1024
        implies that each individual element of the message space is chosen from range (0, 1023) and all
        operations over individual elements are performed modulo P.
    • 𝐾 denotes the dimension of the vectors to be encrypted. For instance, 𝐾 = 100, 𝑃 = 1024
        means the messages to be encrypted are vectors (𝑉0 , … , 𝑉2 ) where each 𝑉3 is chosen from the
        range (0, 1023) and operations are performed component-wise. That is, by defintion,
        (𝑉0 , … , 𝑉2 ) + (𝑉05 , … , 𝑉25 ) = (𝑉0 + 𝑉05 , … , 𝑉2 + 𝑉25 ). The multiplication operation over two
        vectors is defined similarly. The space of all possible vectors (𝑉0 , … , 𝑉2 ) is referred to as the
        message space (MS).
    • 𝐵: denotes an auxiliary parameter that is used to control the complexity of the
        programs/circuits that one can expect to run over the encrypted messages. Lower parameters
        denotes “smaller”, or less expressive, or less complex programs/circuits. Lower parameters,
        generally means smaller parameters of the entire scheme. This, as a result, translates into
        smaller ciphertexts and more efficient evaluation procedures. Higher parameters, generally
        increases key sizes, ciphertext sizes, and complexity of the evaluation procedures. Higher
        parameters are, of course, necessary to evaluate more complex programs.

•   PubKeygen(Params) → SK, PK, EK

The public key-generation algorithm is used to generate a pair of secret and public keys. The public key
can be shared and used by anyone to encrypt messages. The secret key should be kept private by a user
and can be used to decrypt messages. The algorithm also generates an evaluation key that is needed to
perform homomorphic operations over the ciphertexts. It should be given to any entity that will perform
homomorphic operations over the ciphertexts. Any entity that has only the public and the evaluation
keys cannot learn anything about the messages from the ciphertexts only.

•   SecKeygen(Params) → SK, EK
The secret key-generation algorithm is used to generate a secret key. This secret key is needed to both
encrypt and decrypt messages by the scheme. It should be kept private by the user. The algorithm also
generates an evaluation key that is needed to perform homomorphic operations over the ciphertexts.
The evaluation key should be given to any entity that will perform homomorphic operations over the
ciphertexts. Any entity that has only the evaluation key cannot learn anything about the messages from
the ciphertexts only.

•   PubEncrypt(PK, M) → C

The public encryption algorithm takes as input the public key of the scheme and any message M from
the message space. The algorithm outputs a ciphertext C. This algorithm generally needs to be
randomized (that is, use random or pseudo-random coins) to satisfy the security properties.

•   SecEncrypt(SK, M) → C

The secret encryption algorithm takes as input the secret key of the scheme and any message M from
the message space. The algorithm outputs a ciphertext C. This algorithm generally needs to be
randomized (that is, use random or pseudo-random coins) to satisfy the security properties.

•   Decrypt(SK, C) → M

The decryption algorithm takes as input the secret key of the scheme, SK, and a ciphertext C. It outputs a
message M from the message space. The algorithm may also output special symbol FAIL, if the
decryption cannot successfully recover the encrypted message M.

•   EvalAdd(Params, EK, C1, C2) → C3.

EvalAdd is a randomized algorithm that takes as input the system parameters Params, the evaluation
key EK, two ciphertexts C1 and C2, and outputs a ciphertext C3.

The correctness property of EvalAdd is that if C1 is an encryption of plaintext element M1 and C2 is an
encryption of plaintext element M2, then C3 should be an encryption of M1+M2.

•   EvalAddConst(Params, EK, C1, M2) → C3.

EvalAddConst is a randomized algorithm that takes as input the system parameters Params, the
evaluation key EK, a ciphertext C1, and a plaintext M2, and outputs a ciphertext C3.

The correctness property of EvalAddConst is that if C1 is an encryption of plaintext element M1, then C3
should be an encryption of M1+M2.
•   EvalMult(Params, EK, C1, C2) → C3.

EvalMult is a randomized algorithm that takes as input the system parameters Params, the evaluation
key EK, two ciphertexts C1 and C2, and outputs a ciphertext C3.

The correctness property of EvalMult is that if C1 is an encryption of plaintext element M1 and C2 is an
encryption of plaintext element M2, then C3 should be an encryption of M1*M2.

•   EvalMultConst(Params, EK, C1, M2) → C3.

EvalMultConst is a randomized algorithm that takes as input the system parameters Params, the
evaluation key EK, a ciphertexts C1, and a plaintext M2, and outputs a ciphertext C3.

The correctness property of EvalMultConst is that if C1 is an encryption of plaintext element M1, then
C3 should be an encryption of M1*M2.

•   Refresh(Params, flag, EK, C1) → C2.

Refresh is a randomized algorithm that takes as input the system parameters Params, a multi-valued flag
(which can be either one of “Relinearize”, “ModSwitch” or “Bootstrap”), the evaluation key EK, and a
ciphertext C1, and outputs a ciphertext C2.

The correctness property of Refresh is that if C1 is an encryption of plaintext element M1, then C2
should be an encryption of M1 as well.

The desired property of the Refresh algorithm is that it turns a “complex” ciphertext of a message into a
“simple” one of the same message. Two embodiments of the Refresh algorithm are (a) the
bootstrapping procedure, which takes a ciphertext with large noise and outputs a ciphertext of the same
message with a fixed amount of noise; and (b) the key-switching procedure, which takes a ciphertext
under one key and outputs a ciphertext of the same message under a different key.

•   ValidityCheck(Params, EK, [C], COMP) → flag.

ValidityCheck is a deterministic algorithm that takes as input the system parameters Params, the
evaluation key EK, an array of ciphertexts [C], and a specification of the homomorphic computation
encoded as a straight-line program COMP, and outputs a Boolean flag.

The correctness property of ValidityCheck is that if ValidityCheck outputs flag = 1, then doing the
homomorphic computation COMP on the vector of ciphertexts [C] produces a ciphertext that decrypts
to the correct answer.
Section 1.0.2 Properties

Semantic Security or IND-CPA Security: At a high level, a homomorphic encryption scheme is said to be
secure if no adversary has an advantage in guessing (better than ½ chance) whether a given ciphertext is
an encryption of two different messages. This requires encryption to be randomized so that two
different encryptions of the same message do not look the same.

Suppose a user runs the parameter and the key-generation algorithms to provide the key tuple. An
adversary is assumed to have the parameters, the evaluation key EK, a public key PK (only in the public-
key scheme), and can obtain encryptions of messages of its choice. The adversary is then given an
encryption of one of two messages (computed by the above encryption algorithm) of its choice without
knowing which message the encryption corresponds to. The security of HE then guarantees that the
adversary cannot guess which message the encryption corresponds to with significant advantage better
than a ½ chance. This captures the fact that no information about the messages is revealed in the
ciphertext.

Compactness: The compactness property of a homomorphic encryption scheme guarantees that
homomorphic operations on the ciphertexts do not expand the length of the ciphertexts. That is, any
evaluator can perform an arbitrary supported list of evaluation function calls and obtain a ciphertext in
the ciphertext space (that does not depend on the complexity of the evaluated functions).

Efficient decryption: Efficient decryption property says that the homomorphic encryption scheme
always guarantees that the decryption runtime does not depend on the functions which was evaluated
on the ciphertexts.

Section 1.0.3. Homomorphic Encryption Schemes

In this section, we describe the two primary schemes that we recommend for implementation of
homomorphic encryption, [BGV12] and [B12]/[FV12]. In Section 1.0.4 below, we refer to 3 alternative
schemes [YASHE], [NTRU]/[LTV], [GSW]. These alternative schemes have features which BGV and B/FV
do not have, however they also have disadvantages with respect to performance and security.

a. Brakerski-Gentry-Vaikuntanathan (BGV)

We focus here on describing the basic version of the BGV encryption scheme. Optimizations to the basic
scheme will be discussed at the end of this section.

•   BGV.ParamGen(λ, P, K, B) → Params.

Recall that λ is the security level parameter, 𝑃 > 1 is an integer plaintext modulus and 𝐾 ≥ 1 is an
integer vector length.
In the basic BGV scheme, the auxiliary input 𝐵 is simply an integer that determines the maximum
multiplicative depth of the homomorphic computation which is simply the maximum number of
sequential multiplications required to perform the computation. For example, the function
𝑓(𝑥0 , 𝑥: , 𝑥; , 𝑥< ) = 𝑥0 𝑥: + 𝑥; 𝑥< has multiplicative depth 1.

In the basic BGV scheme, the parameters param consists of the degree parameter 𝑛, the ciphertext
modulus parameter 𝑞, and the error distribution 𝜒 which is a discrete Gaussian distribution with
standard deviation parameter 𝛼 set according to the security guidelines specified in Section 5.

•   BGV.SecKeygen(params) → SK, EK

In the basic BGV scheme, the secret key SK is an element s chosen from the error distribution 𝜒.

In the basic BGV scheme, there is no evaluation key EK.

•   BGV.PubKeygen(params) → SK, PK, EK.

In the basic BGV scheme, PubKeygen first runs SecKeygen and obtains (SK, EK) where SK is an element 𝑠
that belongs to the ring R.

PubKeygen chooses a uniformly random element a from the ring 𝑅/𝑞𝑅 and outputs the public key PK
which is a pair of ring elements (𝑎, 𝑏) = (𝑎, 𝑎 ∗ 𝑠 + 𝑝 ∗ 𝑒) where 𝑒 is chosen from the error distribution
𝜒.

•   BGV.SecEncrypt(SK, M) → C

In the basic BGV scheme, SecEncrypt first maps the message M which comes from the plaintext space
𝑍JK into an element of the ring 𝑅/𝑝𝑅.

SecEncrypt then samples a uniformly random element a from the ring R/qR and outputs the pair of ring
elements (𝑐M , 𝑐0 ) = (𝑎, 𝑎 ∗ 𝑠 + 𝑝 ∗ 𝑒 + 𝑀) where 𝑒 is chosen from the error distribution 𝜒.

•   BGV.PubEncrypt(PK, M) → C

In the basic BGV scheme, Pub.Encrypt first maps the message 𝑀 which comes from the plaintext space
𝑍JK into an element of the ring 𝑅/𝑝𝑅. Recall that the public key PK is a pair of elements (𝑎, 𝑏).

PubEncrypt then samples three uniformly random elements 𝑟, 𝑓 and 𝑓’ from the error distribution 𝜒 and
outputs the pair of ring elements (𝑐M , 𝑐0 ) = (𝑎 ∗ 𝑟 + 𝑓, 𝑏 ∗ 𝑟 + 𝑝 ∗ 𝑓’ + 𝑀).
•   BGV.Decrypt(SK, C) → M

In the basic BGV scheme, Decrypt takes as input the secret key which is an element 𝑠 of the ring 𝑅, and a
ciphertext C = (𝑐M , 𝑐0 ) which is a pair of elements from the ring 𝑅/𝑞𝑅.

We remark that a ciphertext C produced as the output of the encryption algorithm has two elements in
𝑅/𝑞𝑅, but upon homomorphic evaluation, ciphertexts can grow to have more ring elements. The
decryption algorithm has to be modified appropriately to handle such ciphertexts.

Decrypt first computes the ring element 𝑐M ∗ 𝑠 + 𝑐0 over 𝑅/𝑞𝑅 and interprets it as an element 𝑐’ in the
ring 𝑅. It then computes 𝑐’ (mod 𝑝), an element of 𝑅/𝑝𝑅, which it outputs.

•   BGV.EvalAdd(Params, EK, C1, C2) → C3.

In the basic BGV scheme, EvalAdd takes as input ciphertexts C1 = (𝑐0,M , 𝑐0,0 ) and C2 = (𝑐:,M , 𝑐:,0 ) and
outputs C3 = (𝑐0,M + 𝑐:,M , 𝑐0,0 + 𝑐:,0 ).

•   BGV.EvalMult(Params, EK, C1, C2) → C3.

In the basic BGV scheme, EvalMult takes as input ciphertexts C1 = (𝑐0,M , 𝑐0,0 ) and C2 = (𝑐:,M , 𝑐:,0 ) and
outputs C3 = (𝑐0,M ∗ 𝑐:,M , 𝑐0,M ∗ 𝑐:,0 + 𝑐0,0 ∗ 𝑐:,M , 𝑐0,0 ∗ 𝑐:,0 ).

The Full BGV Scheme

In the basic BGV scheme, ciphertexts grow as a result of EvalMult. For example, given two ciphertexts
each composed of two ring elements, EvalMult as described above results in three ring elements. This
can be further repeated, but has the disadvantage that upon evaluating a degree-𝑑 polynomial on the
plaintexts, the resulting ciphertext has 𝑑 + 1 ring elements.

This deficiency is mitigated in the full BGV scheme, with two additional procedures. The first is called
“Key Switching” or “Relinearization” which is implemented by calling the Refresh subroutine with flag =
“KeySwitch”, and the second is “Modulus Switching” or “Modulus Reduction” which is implemented by
calling the Refresh subroutine with flag = “ModSwitch”. Support for key switching and modulus
switching also necessitates augmenting the key generation algorithm.

For details on the implementation of the full BGV scheme, we refer the reader to [BGV12].

Properties Supported. The BGV scheme supports many features described in Section 6, including
packed evaluations of circuits and can be extended into a threshold homomorphic encryption scheme.
In terms of security, the BGV homomorphic evaluation algorithms can be augmented to provide
evaluation privacy. Note that evaluation privacy is defined below with respect to semi-honest
adversaries.

b. Brakerski/Fan-Vercauteren (BFV)

We assume the parameters are instantiated following the recommendations outlined in Section 5. The
parameters include:
    • Two distributions 𝐷0 , 𝐷:
    • a ring 𝑅 and its corresponding integer modulo q
    • Integer 𝑇, and 𝐿 = log Y 𝑞. T is the bit-decomposition modulus.
    • Plaintext modulus 𝑃, and plaintext ring 𝑅/𝑃𝑅
    • Integer 𝑊 = ⌊𝑞/𝑃 ⌋


•   BFV.SecKeygen(Params)

The secret key SK of the encryption scheme is a random element 𝑆 from the distribution 𝐷: defined as
per Section 5. The evaluation key consists of 𝐿 LWE samples encoding the secret 𝑆 in a specific fashion.
In particular, for 𝑖 = 0, … , 𝐿, sample a random 𝐴3 from 𝑅 and error 𝐸3 from 𝐷0 , compute

                                  𝐸𝐾3 = a−(𝐴3 𝑆 + 𝐸3 ) + 𝑇 3 𝑆 : , 𝐴3 c,
and set 𝐸𝐾 = (𝐸𝐾M , … , 𝐸𝐾d ).

•   BFV.PubKeygen(params):

The secret key SK of the encryption scheme is a random element S from the distribution D2 defined as
per Section XYZ. The public key is a random LWE sample with the secret S. In particular, it is computed
by sampling a random element 𝐴 from 𝑅 and an error 𝐸 from the distribution 𝐷0 and setting:
𝑃𝐾 = (−(𝐴𝑆 + 𝐸), 𝐴), where all operations are performed over the ring 𝑅.

The evaluation key is computed as in BFV.SecKeygen.

•   BFV.PubEncrypt(PK, M):

BFV.Pub.Encrypt first maps the message 𝑀 which comes from the message space into an element in the
ring 𝑅/𝑃𝑅 .

To encrypt a message 𝑀 from 𝑅/𝑃𝑅, parse the public key as a pair 𝑃𝐾M , 𝑃𝐾0 . Encryption consists of two
LWE samples using a secret 𝑈 where 𝑃𝐾M , 𝑃𝐾0 is treated as public randomness. The first LWE sample
encodes the message 𝑀, whereas the second sample is auxiliary.
In particular, C = (𝑃𝐾M ∗ 𝑈 + 𝐸0 + 𝑊 ∗ 𝑀, 𝑃𝐾0 ∗ 𝑈 + 𝐸: ) where 𝑈 is a sampled from 𝐷: , and 𝐸0 , 𝐸:
are sampled from 𝐷0 .

•   BFV.SecEncrypt(PK, M):

•   BFV.Decrypt(SK, C):

The main invariant of the BFV scheme is that when we interpret the elements of a ciphertext
C as the coefficients of a polynomial then, C(S) = 𝑊 ∗ 𝑀 + 𝐸 for some “small” error 𝐸. From it, 𝑀 can
be recovered easily by dividing by 𝑊 and rounding the result.

•   BFV.EvalAdd(EK, C1, C2):

Parse the ciphertexts as Ci = (𝐶3,M , 𝐶3,0 ). Then, addition simply corresponds to component-wise addition
of two ciphertext components.
That is, 𝐶 g = (𝐶0,M + 𝐶:,M , 𝐶0,0 + 𝐶:,0 ).
It is easy to verify that 𝐶 g (𝑆) = 𝑊 ∗ (𝑀0 + 𝑀: ) + 𝐸, where M1, M2 are messages encrypted in C1,
C2 and E is the new error component.

•   BFV.EvalMult(EK, C1, C2):

To multiple two ciphertexts, we interpret each ciphertext as a list of polynomial coefficients over a
variable. EvalMult is just a polynomial multiplication (followed by a rounding step to the nearest
integer).
Concretely, 𝐶 ∗ = 𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑((𝑃/𝑞)𝐶0 ∗ 𝐶: ) 𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑞. Recalls that 𝑊 = ⌊𝑞/𝑃 ⌋).
It is somewhat easy to verify that 𝐶 ∗ (𝑆) = 𝑊 ∗ (𝑀0 ∗ 𝑀: ) + 𝐸, for some new error 𝐸.

One may note that the ciphertext size increases in this operation. One may apply a Refresh algorithm to
obtain a new compact ciphertext of the original size encoding the same message 𝑀0 ∗ 𝑀: .

Properties Supported. The complete BFV scheme supports many features described in Section 6,
including packed evaluations of circuits and can be extended into a threshold homomorphic encryption
scheme. In terms of security, the BFV homomorphic evaluation algorithms can be augmented to provide
evaluation privacy.

For details on the implementation of the full BFV scheme, we refer the reader to [B12], [FV12].

c. Comparison between BGV and BFV

When implementing HE schemes, there are many choices which can be made to optimize performance
for different architectures and different application scenarios. This makes a direct comparison of these
schemes quite challenging. A paper by Costache and Smart [CS16] gives some initial comparisons
between BGV, B/FV and two of the schemes described below: YASHE and LTV/NTRU. A paper by Kim and
Lauter [KL15] compares the performance of the BGV and YASHE schemes in the context of applications.
Since there is further ongoing work in this area, we leave this comparison as an open research question.

Section 1.0.4. Other Schemes

Yet Another Somewhat Homomorphic Encryption ([YASHE]) is similar to the BGV and BFV schemes and
offers the same set of features.

The scheme NTRU/Lopez-Alt-Tromer-Vaikuntanathan ([NTRU]/[LTV]) relies on the NTRU assumption
(also called the “small polynomial ratios assumption”). It offers all the features of BGV and BFV, and in
addition, also offers an extension that supports multi-key homomorphism.

The scheme proposed by Gentry-Sahai-Waters [GSW13] offers a different set of trade-offs between
advantages and disadvantages.

The GSW scheme and Bootstrapping

Currently, the most practical homomorphic encryption schemes only allow to perform bounded depth
computations. These schemes can be transformed into fully homomorphic ones (capable of arbitrary
computations) using a “bootstrapping” technique introduced by Gentry [G09], which essentially consists
of a homomorphic evaluation of the decryption algorithm given the encryption of the secret key.
Bootstrapping is a very time consuming operation, and improving on its efficiency is still a very active
research area. So, it may still not be ready for standardization, but it is the next natural step to be
considered.

Bootstrapping using the BGV or BFV schemes requires assuming that lattice problems are
computationally hard to approximate within factors that grow superpolynomially in the lattice
dimension n. This is a stronger assumption than the inapproximability within polynomial factors
required by standard (non-homomorphic) lattice-based public key encryption.

In [GSW13], Gentry, Sahai and Waters proposed a new homomorphic encryption scheme (still based on
lattices) that offers a different set of trade-offs than BGV and BFV. An important feature of this scheme
is that it can be used to bootstrap homomorphic encryption based on the assumption that lattice
problems are hard to approximate within polynomial factors. Here we briefly describe the GSW
encryption, and show how both its security and applicability to bootstrapping are closely related to LWE
encryption, as used by the BGV and BFV schemes. So, future standardization of bootstrapping (possibly
based on the GSW scheme) could build on the current standardization effort.
For simplicity, we focus on secret key encryption, as this is typically enough for applications to
bootstrapping. The GSW secret key encryption scheme (or, more specifically, its secret key, ring-based
variant presented in [AP14, DM15]) can be described as follows:
    •   GSW.Keygen(params):
        This is essentially the same as the key generation procedure of the BGV or BFV schemes, taking
        a similar set of security parameters, and producing a random ring element S which serves as a
        secret key.

    •   GSW.SecEncrypt(S,M):
        Choose a 2*log(q) dimensional uniformly random vector A in R2 log(q), a small random vector E
        (with entries chosen independently at random from the error distribution), and output the
        ciphertext C = (A,A*S+E) + M*G where G=[I,2 I,…,2k-1 I] is a gadget matrix consisting of k=log(q)
        copies of the 2x2 identity matrix I (over the ring), scaled by powers of 2.

We omit the description of the decryption procedure, as it is not needed for bootstrapping. Notice that:

    •   The secret key generation process is the same as most other LWE-based encryption schemes,
        including BGV and BFV.
    •   The encryption procedure essentially consists of 2*log(q) independent application of the basic
        LWE/BGV/BFV encryption: choose random key elements a and e, and outputs (a,as+e+m), but
        applied to scaled copies of the message 2i M. (The even rows of the GSW ciphertext encrypt the
        message as (a+m,as+e), but this is just a minor variant on LWE encryption, and equivalent to it
        from a security standpoint.)
    •   Security rests on the standard LWE assumption, as used also by BGV and BFV, which says that
        the distribution (A,A*S+E) is pseudorandom.

So, GSW can be based on LWE security estimates similar to those used to instantiate the BGV or BFV
cryptosystems.

In [GSW13] it is shown how (a public key version of) this cryptosystem supports both addition and
multiplication, without the need for an evaluation key, which has applications to identity-based and
attribute-based homomorphic encryption. Later, in [BV14] it was observed how the GSW multiplication
operation exhibits an asymmetric noise growth that can be exploited to implement bootstrapping based
on the hardness of approximating lattice problems within polynomial factors. Many subsequent papers
(e.g., [AP14, DM15, GINX16, CGGI16]) improve on the efficiency of [BV14], but they all share the
following features with [BV14]:
     • They all use variants of the GSW encryption to implement bootstrapping.
     • Security only relies on the hardness of approximating lattice problems within polynomial factors.
     • They are capable of bootstrapping any LWE-based encryption scheme, i.e., any scheme which
         includes an LWE encryption of the message as part of the ciphertext. LWE-based schemes
         include BGV, BFV and GSW.
In particular, GSW can be used to implement the bootstrapping procedure for BGV and BFV, and turn
them into fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) schemes.
Section 1.0.5. Additional Features & Discussion

Distributed HE

Homomorphic Encryption is especially suitable to use for multiple users who may want to run
computations on an aggregate of their sensitive data. For the setting of multiple users, an additional
property which we call threshold-HE is desirable. In threshold-HE the key-generation algorithms,
encryption and decryption algorithms are replaced by a distributed-key-generation (DKG) algorithm,
distributed-encryption (DE) and distributed-decryption (DD) algorithms. Both the distributed-key-
generation algorithm and the distributed-decryption algorithm are executed via an interactive process
among the participating users. The evaluation algorithms EvalAdd, EvalMult, EvalMultConst,
EvalAddConst and Refresh remain unchanged.

We will now describe the functionality of the new algorithms.

We begin with the distributed-key-generation (DKG) algorithm to be implemented by an interactive
protocol among 𝑡 parties 𝑝0 , … , 𝑝l . The DKG algorithm is a randomized algorithm. The inputs to DKG are:
security parameter, number of parties 𝑡, and threshold parameter 𝑑.
The output of DKG is a vector of secret keys 𝑠 = (𝑠0 , . . . . , 𝑠l ) of dimension 𝑡 and a public evaluation key
Ek where party 𝑝3 receives (Ek,𝑠3 ).
We remark that party 𝑝3 doesn’t receive 𝑠m for 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 and party 𝑖 should maintain the secrecy of its secret
key 𝑠3 .

Next, the distributed-encryption (DE) algorithm is described.
The DE algorithm is a randomized algorithm which can be run by any party 𝑝3
The inputs to DE run by party 𝑝3 are: the secret key 𝑠3 and the plaintext 𝑀
The output of DE is a ciphertext C.

Finally, we describe the distributed-decryption (DD) algorithm to be implemented by an interactive
protocol among a subset of the 𝑡 parties 𝑝0 , … , 𝑝l .
The DD algorithm is a randomized algorithm.
The inputs to DD are: a subset of secret keys 𝑠 = (𝑠0 , . . . . , 𝑠l ), the threshold parameter 𝑑, and a
ciphertext C. In particular, every participating party 𝑝3 provides the input𝑠3 . The ciphertext C can be
provided by any party.
The output of DD is: plaintext 𝑀.

The correctness requirement that the above algorithms should satisfy is as follows.
If at least 𝑑 of the parties correctly follow the prescribed interactive protocol that implements the DD
decryption algorithm, then the output of the decryption algorithm will be correct.
The security requirement is for semantic security to hold as long as fewer than 𝑑 parties collude
adversarially.
An example usage application for (DKG,DE,DD) is for two hospitals, 𝑡 = 2 and 𝑑 = 2 with sensitive data
sets 𝑀0 and 𝑀: (respectively) who want to compute some analytics 𝐹 on the joint data set without
revealing anything about 𝑀0 and 𝑀: except for what is revealed by 𝐹(𝑀0 , 𝑀: ).

In such a case the two hospitals execute the interactive protocol for DKG and obtain their respective
secret keys 𝑠0 and 𝑠: and the evaluation key EK. They each use DE on secret key 𝑠3 and data 𝑀3 to
produce ciphertext Ci. The evaluation algorithms on C1, C2 and the evaluation key EK allow the
computation of a ciphertext C which is an encryption of 𝐹(𝑀0 , 𝑀: ). Now, the hospitals execute the
interactive protocol DD using their secret keys and ciphertext C to obtain 𝐹(𝑀0 , 𝑀: ).

Active Attacks

One can consider stricter security requirements beyond semantic security. For example,
Suppose a client holds data 𝑀 and wishes to compute 𝐹(𝑀) for a specified algorithm 𝐹.

The client outsources the computation of 𝐹(𝑀) to a cloud maintaining the privacy of 𝑀 as follows. The
client encrypts 𝑀 into ciphertext C and hands C to the cloud server. The server is supposed to use the
evaluation algorithms to compute a ciphertext C’ which is an encryption of 𝐹(𝑀) and return this to the
client for decryption.
Suppose that instead the cloud computes some other C’’ which is the encryption of 𝐺(𝑀) for some
other function 𝐺. This may be problematic to the client as it would introduce errors of potentially
significant consequences. This is an example of an active attack which is not ruled out by semantic
security.

We remark that to such attacks against homomorphic encryption schemes cannot be prevented without
additional measures.

Another, possibly even more severe attack, is the situation where the adversary somehow gains
temporary ability to decrypt certain C’s of its choice with the goal of learning sensitive data of the client.
Again, this attack is not addressed by the semantic security guarantee.

Evaluation Privacy

A desirable additional security property beyond semantic security would be that the ciphertext C hides
which computations were performed homomorphically to obtain C. We call this security requirement
Evaluation Privacy.
For example, suppose a cloud service offers a service in the form of computing a proprietary machine
learning algorithm 𝐹 on the client’s sensitive data. As before, the client encrypts its data 𝑀 to obtain C
and sends the cloud C and the evaluation key EK. The cloud now computes C’ which is an encryption of
𝐹(𝑀) to hand back to the client. Evaluation privacy will guarantee that C’ does not reveal anything
about the algorithm 𝐹 which is not derivable from the pair (𝑀, 𝐹(𝑀)). Here we can also distinguish
between semi-honest and malicious evaluation privacy depending on whether the ciphertext C is
generated correctly according to the Encrypt algorithm.

A weaker requirement would be to require evaluation privacy only with respect to an adversary who
does not know the secret decryption key. This may be relevant for an adversary who intercepts
encrypted network traffic.

Key Evolution

Say that a corpus of ciphertexts encrypted under a secret key SK is held by a server, and the client who
owns SK realizes that SK may have been compromised.
It is desirable for an encryption scheme to have the following key evolution property. Allow the client to
generate a new secret key SK’ which replaces SK, a new evaluation key EK’, and a transformation key TK
such that: the server, given only TK and EK’, may convert all ciphertexts in the corpus to new ciphertexts
which (1) can be decrypted using SK’ and (2) satisfy semantic security even for an adversary who holds
SK.

Any sufficiently homomorphic encryption scheme satisfies the key evolution property as follows. Let TK
be the encryption of SK under SK’. Namely, TK is a ciphertext which when decrypted using secret key SK’
yields SK. A server given TK and EK’, can convert a ciphertext C in the corpus into C’ by homomorphically
evaluating the decryption process. Security follows from semantic security of the original homomorphic
encryption scheme.

Proxy Re-encryption

Imagine two parties each with a different secret key SK1 and Sk2 respectively.
They wish to enable a third party to convert ciphertext decryptable with SK1 to ciphertext (with the
same underlying plaintext) decryptable with SK2.
The idea is to generate a so called re-encryption key TK, the knowledge of which allows this conversion
to occur and to hand TK to the third party. We they say that the third party is a proxy which performs
proxy re-encryption.
Note that the key evolution procedure described above can also be utilized to achieve
Proxy re-encryption. In this case SK1=SK and SK2=Sk’.

The security property required is that the third party holding TK cannot decrypt ciphertexts which can be
decrypted with SK1 or SK2 alone.
This security property follows from semantic security of the original homomorphic encryption scheme.



Side Channel Attacks
Side channel attacks consider adversaries who can obtain partial information about the secret key of an
encryption scheme, for example by running timing attacks during the execution of the decryption
algorithm. A desirable security requirement from an encryption scheme is resiliency against such
attacks, often referred to as leakage resiliency. That is, it should be impossible to violate semantic
security even in presence of side channel attacks. Naturally, leakage resilience can hold only against
limited information leakage about the secret key.

An attractive feature of encryption schemes based on intractability of integer lattice problems, and in
particular known HE schemes based on intractability of integer lattice problems, is that they satisfy
leakage resilience to a great extent. This is in contrast to public-key cryptosystems such as RSA.



Identity Based Encryption

In an identity based encryption scheme it is possible to send encrypted messages to users without
knowing either a public key or a secret key, but only the identity of the recipient where the identity can
be a legal name or an email address.

This is possible as long as there exists a trusted party (TP) that publishes some public parameters PP and
holds a master secret key MSK. A user with identity X upon authenticating herself to the TP (e.g. by
showing a government issued ID), will receive a secret key SKx that the user can use to decrypt any
ciphertext that was sent to the identity X. To encrypt message M to identity X, one needs only to know
the public parameters PP and X.

Identity based homomorphic encryption is a variant of public key homomorphic encryption which may
be desirable.
Remark: A modification of GSW supports identity based homomorphic encryption.
                             Homomorphic Encryption Standard Section 2.0
                                 Recommended Security Parameters

Section 2.0.1 Hard Problems

This section describes the problems which are assumed to be hard as the basis for the security of the
homomorphic encryption schemes. Known security reductions to other problems are not included here.
Section 2.0.2 below describes the best currently known attacks on these problems and their concrete
running times. Section 2.0.3 below recommends concrete parameter choices to achieve various security
levels against currently known attacks.

a. The Learning with Errors (LWE) Assumption

The LWE assumption is defined by a triple of parameters (𝑛, 𝑚, 𝑞, 𝜒) where 𝑛 is a positive integer
referred to as the “dimension parameter”, 𝑞 is a positive integer referred to as the “modulus
parameter” and 𝜒 is a probability distribution over rational integers referred to as the “error
distribution”.

The LWE assumption requires that the following two probability distributions are computationally
indistinguishable:

Distribution 1. Choose a uniformly random matrix 𝑛 × 𝑚 matrix 𝐴, a uniformly random (row) vector 𝑠
from the vector space 𝑍st , and a (row) vector 𝑒 from 𝑍 u where each coordinate is chosen from the error
distribution 𝜒. Compute 𝑏 ∶= 𝑠𝐴 + 𝑒. By definition, all computations here are carried out modulo 𝑞.
Output (𝐴, 𝑏).

Distribution 2. Choose a uniformly random 𝑛 × 𝑚 matrix 𝐴, and a uniformly random (row) vector 𝑏 from
𝑍su . Output (𝐴, 𝑏).

The error distribution 𝜒 can be either a discrete Gaussian distribution over the integers, or another
distribution supported on small integers. We refer the reader to Section 2.0.2 for more details on
particular error distributions, algorithms for sampling from these distributions, and the associated
security implications.

b. The Ring Learning with Errors (RLWE) Assumption

The RLWE assumption is a specific case of LWE where the matrix 𝐴 is chosen to have special algebraic
structure.

The RLWE assumption is defined by a triple of parameters (𝑛, 𝑚, 𝑞, 𝜒) where 𝑛 is a positive integer
which is a power of two, referred to as the “degree parameter”, 𝑞 is a positive integer referred to as the
“modulus parameter” and 𝜒 is a probability distribution over the ring R referred to as the “error
distribution”.

The RLWE assumption requires that the following two probability distributions are computationally
indistinguishable:

Distribution 1. Choose a uniformly random element a from the ring 𝑅/𝑞𝑅, a uniformly random element
𝑠 from the ring 𝑅/𝑞𝑅, and an element 𝑒 from the ring 𝑅 chosen from the error distribution 𝜒. Compute
𝑏 ∶= 𝑠𝑎 + 𝑒. By definition, all computations here are carried out over the ring 𝑅/𝑞𝑅. Output (𝑎, 𝑏).

Distribution 2. Choose a uniformly random element 𝑎 from the ring 𝑅/𝑞𝑅, and a uniformly random
element 𝑏 from the ring 𝑅/𝑞𝑅. Output (𝑎, 𝑏).

The error distribution 𝜒 can be either a discrete Gaussian distribution over the ring 𝑅, or another
distribution supported on “small” ring elements. We refer the reader to Section 2.0.3 for more details
on particular error distributions, algorithms for sampling from these distributions, and the associated
security implications.

Section 2.0.2 Known Attacks and Running Times

We review algorithms for solving the LWE problem and use them to suggest concrete parameter
choices. The schemes described above all have versions based on the LWE and the RLWE assumptions.
When the schemes based on RLWE are instantiated with rings which are 2-power or prime cyclotomic
rings, we do not currently know better attacks on RLWE than on LWE. The following estimates and
attacks refer to attacks on the LWE problem with the specified parameters. In a later section, we will
discuss security issues related to varying the choice of ring.

Much of this section is based on the paper by Albrecht, Player, and Scott (Albrecht, Player, & Scott,
2015), the online Estimator tool which accompanies that paper, and (Albrecht, 2017; Albrecht, Göpfert,
Virdia, & Wunderer, 2017). Indeed, we reuse text from those works here. Estimated security levels in all
the tables in this section were obtained by running the Estimator based on its state in July 2017. The
tables in this section give the best attacks (in terms of running time expressed in 𝑙𝑜𝑔: ) among all known
attacks as implemented by the Estimator tool. As attacks or implementations of attacks change, or as
new attacks are found, these tables will need to be updated. First, we describe all the attacks which give
the best running times when working on parameter sizes in the range which are interesting for
Homomorphic Encryption.
The LWE problem asks to recover a secret vector 𝑠 ∈ 𝑍st , given a matrix 𝐴 ∈ 𝑍su×t and a vector 𝑐 ∈ 𝑍su
such that 𝐴𝑠 + 𝑒 = 𝑐 𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑞 for a short error vector 𝑒 ∈ 𝑍su sampled coordinate-wise from an error
distribution 𝜒. The decision variant of LWE asks to distinguish between an LWE instance (𝐴, 𝑐) and
uniformly random (𝐴, 𝑐) ∈ 𝑍su×t × 𝑍su . To assess the security provided by a given set of parameters
𝑛, 𝜒, 𝑞, two strategies are typically considered.
The primal strategy finds the closest vector to 𝑐 in the integral span of columns of 𝐴 mod 𝑞 ([LP11]),
i.e. it solves the corresponding Bounded Distance Decoding problem (BDD) directly.
a. Primal (uSVP variant)

Writing [𝐼t |𝐴′] for the reduced row echelon form of 𝐴Y ∈ 𝑍st×u (with high probability and after
appropriate permutation of columns), this task can be reformulated as solving the unique Shortest
Vector Problem (uSVP) in the 𝑚 + 1 dimensional 𝑞-ary lattice

                                                   𝐼t       𝐴′       0
                                      𝛬 = 𝑍 ug0 ⋅ • 0     𝑞𝐼u‚t      0ƒ.
                                                   𝑐Y                𝑡
by Kannan’s embedding with embedding factor 𝑡.

The lattice 𝛬 has volume 𝑡 ⋅ 𝑞u‚t and contains a vector of norm „∥ 𝑒 ∥: + 𝑡 : which is unusually short,
i.e. the gap between the first and second Minkowski minimum 𝜆: (𝛬)⁄𝜆0 (𝛬) is large. If the secret
vector 𝑠 is also short, there is a second established embedding reducing LWE to uSVP. By inspection, we
seen that the vector (𝜈𝑠|𝑒|1), for some 𝜈 ≠ 0, is contained in the lattice 𝛬
                                                            ‹
                                    t   ug0
                                                  1
                                (  )
                        𝛬 = ˆ𝑥 ∈ 𝜈𝑍 × 𝑍             |  |
                                            |𝑥 ⋅ ‰ 𝐴 𝐼u − 𝑐Š ≡ 0 𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑞•,
                                                  𝜈

where 𝜈 allows to balance the size of the secret and the noise. An (𝑛 + 𝑚 + 1) × (𝑛 + 𝑚 + 1) basis 𝑀
for 𝛬 can be constructed as

                                             𝜈𝐼t        −𝐴‹    0
                                          𝑀=• 0         𝑞𝐼u    0ƒ.
                                              0          𝑐     1
To find short vectors, lattice reduction can be applied. Thus, to establish the cost of solving an LWE
instance, we may consider the cost of lattice reduction for solving uSVP. In (Alkim, Ducas, Pöppelmann,
& Schwabe, 2016) it is predicted that 𝑒 can be found if:

                               „𝛽⁄𝑑 ∥ (𝑒|1) ∥≈ „𝛽𝜎 ≤ 𝛿M:“‚” 𝑉𝑜𝑙(𝛬)0⁄” ,

where 𝛿M depends on 𝛽 which is the block size of the underlying blockwise lattice reduction algorithm.
This prediction was experimentally verified in (Albrecht et al., 2017).

b. Primal by BDD Enumeration (decoding).

This attack is due to Lindner and Peikert [LP11]. It starts with a sufficiently reduced basis, e.g., using BKZ
in block size 𝛽, and then applies a modified version of the recursive Nearest Plane algorithm due to
Babai [Bab86]. Given a basis 𝐵 and a target vector 𝑡, the Nearest Plane algorithm finds a vector such that
the error vector lies in the fundamental parallelepiped of the Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization (GSO) of
𝐵.

Lindner and Peikert note that for a BKZ-reduced basis 𝐵, the fundamental parallelepiped is long and
thin, by the Geometric Series Assumption (GSA) due to Schnorr that the GSO of a BKZ-reduced basis
decay geometrically and this makes the probability that the Gaussian error vector 𝑒 falls in the
corresponding fundamental parallelepiped very low. To improve this success probability, they “fatten”
the parallelepiped by essentially scaling its principal axes. They do this by running the Nearest Plane
algorithm on several distinct planes at each level of recursion. For a Gaussian error vector, the
probability that it falls in this fattened parallelepiped is expressed in terms of the scaling factors and the
lengths of the GSO of 𝐵. This can be seen as a form of pruned CVP enumeration (Liu & Nguyen, 2013).
The run time of the Nearest Planes algorithm mainly depends on the number of points enumerated,
which is the product of the scaling factors. The run time of the basis reduction step depends on the
quality of the reduced basis, expressed, for instance, by the root Hermite factor 𝛿M. The scaling factors
and the quality of the basis together determine the success probability of the attack. Hence to maximize
the success probability, the scaling factors are determined based on the (predicted) quality of the BKZ-
reduced basis. There is no closed formula for the scaling factors. The Estimator uses a simple greedy
algorithm to find these parameters due to ([LP11]), but this is known to not be optimal. The scaling
factors and the quality of the basis are chosen to achieve a target success probability and to minimize
the running time (by balancing the running time of BKZ reduction and the final enumeration step).
c. Dual. The dual strategy finds short vectors in the lattice
                                   𝑞𝛬∗ = •𝑥 ∈ 𝑍su ∨ 𝑥 ⋅ 𝐴 ≡ 0 𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑞—,

i.e. it solves the Short Integer Solutions problem (SIS). Given such a short vector 𝑣, we can decide if an
instance is LWE by computing ⟨𝑣, 𝑐⟩ = ⟨𝑣, 𝑒⟩ which is short whenever 𝑣 and 𝑒 are sufficiently short
(Micciancio & Regev, 2009).

We must however ensure that ⟨𝑣, 𝑒⟩ indeed is short enough, since if is too large, the (Gaussian)
distribution of will be too flat to distinguish from random. Following ([LP11]), for an LWE instance with
parameters 𝑛, 𝛼, 𝑞 and a vector 𝑣 of length ∥ 𝑣 ∥ such that 𝑣 ⋅ 𝐴 ≡ 0 𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑞, the advantage of
distinguishing ⟨𝑣, 𝑒⟩ from random is close to
                                            𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝜋(∥ 𝑣 ∥⋅ 𝛼 ): ).

To produce a short enough 𝑣, we may again call a lattice-reduction algorithm. In particular, we may call
the BKZ algorithm with block size 𝛽. After performing BKZ-𝛽 reduction the first vector in the
transformed lattice basis will have norm 𝛿Mu ⋅ 𝑉𝑜𝑙(𝑞𝛬∗ )0⁄u . In our case, the expression above simplifies
                                                                                    t•žŸs
to ∥ 𝑣 ∥≈ 𝛿Mu ⋅ 𝑞t⁄u whp. The minimum of this expression is attained at 𝑚 = œ                (Micciancio &
                                                                                     •žŸ ¡
Regev, 2009). The attack can be modified to take small or sparse secrets into account (Albrecht, 2017).

Lattice Reduction algorithm: BKZ

BKZ is an iterative, block-wise algorithm for basis reduction. It requires solving the SVP problem (using
sieving or enumeration, say) in a smaller dimension 𝛽, the block size. First, the input lattice 𝛬 is LLL
reduced, giving a basis 𝑏M , … , 𝑏t‚0 . For 0 ≤ 𝑖 < 𝑛, the vectors 𝑏3 , … , 𝑏u3t(3g“‚0,t‚0) are projected onto
the orthogonal complement of the span of 𝑏M , … 𝑏3‚0 ; this projection is called a local block. In the local
block, we find a shortest vector, view it as a vector 𝑏 ∈ 𝛬 of and perform LLL on the list of vectors
𝑏3 , … , 𝑏u3t(3g“‚0,t‚0) , 𝑏 to remove linear dependencies. We use the resulting vectors to update
𝑏3 , … , 𝑏u3t(3g“‚0,t‚0) . This process is repeated until a basis is not updated after a full pass.

There have been improvements to BKZ, which are collectively referred to BKZ 2.0 (see [CN11] for
example). In particular, in our use of the Estimator we make two assumptions about the cost of running
BKZ, distinguished by how conservative they are — “sieve” and “ADPS16” — as explained below.
a. Block Size.

To establish the required block size 𝛽, we solve

                                                    𝛽      0        1
                                  𝑙𝑜𝑔𝛿M = 𝑙𝑜𝑔 £        (𝜋𝛽)“ ¤ ⋅
                                                   2𝜋𝑒           2 𝛽 − 1)
                                                                  (

for 𝛽, see the PhD Thesis of Yuanmi Chen (Chen, 2013) for a justification of this.

b. Cost of SVP.

Several algorithms can be used to realize the SVP oracle inside BKZ. Asymptotically, the fastest known
algorithms are sieving algorithms. The fastest, known classical algorithm runs in time 2M.:¥:“gž(“)
(Becker, Ducas, Gama, & Laarhoven, 2016). The fastest, known quantum algorithm runs in time
2M.:¦§“gž(“) (Laarhoven, 2015). The “sieve” estimate approximates 𝑜 (𝛽) by 16.4 based on some
experimental evidence in (Becker et al., 2016). The “ADPS16” from (Alkim et al., 2016) suppresses the
𝑜(𝛽) term completely. All times are expressed in elementary operations mod 𝑞.

c. Calls to SVP.

The BKZ algorithm proceeds by repeatedly calling an oracle for computing a shortest vector on a smaller
lattice of dimension 𝛽. In each “tour” on a 𝑑-dimensional lattice, 𝑑 such calls are made and the
algorithm is typically terminated once it stops making sufficient progress in reducing the basis.
Experimentally, it has been established that only the first few tours make significant progress (Chen,
2013), so the “sieve” cost model assumes that one BKZ call costs as much as 8𝑑 calls to the SVP oracle.
However, it seems plausible that the cost of these calls can be amortized across different calls, which is
why the “ADPS16” cost model from (Alkim et al., 2016) assumes the cost of BKZ to be the same as one
SVP oracle call.

d. BKZ Cost. In summary:
sieve
a call to BKZ-𝛽 costs 8𝑑 ⋅ 2M.:¥:“g0¦.< operations classically and 8𝑑 ⋅ 2M.:¦§“g0¦.< operations quantumly.

ADPST16
a call to BKZ-𝛽 costs 2M.:¥:“ operations classically and 2M.:¦§“ operations quantumly.

We stress that both of these cost models are very conservative and that no known implementation of
lattice reduction achieves these running times. Furthermore, these estimates completely ignore
memory consumption, which, too, is 2©(“).

e. Calls to BKZ.

To pick parameters, we normalize running times to a fixed success probability. That is, all our expected
costs are for an adversary winning with probability 51%. However, as mentioned above, it is often more
efficient to run some algorithm many times with parameters that have a low probability of success
instead of running the same algorithm under parameter choices which ensure a high probability of
success. Thus, in general, we would expect several calls to BKZ to be required: ≈ 1⁄𝜀 for search
problems resp.~≈ 1⁄𝜀 : for decision problems.
2.0.3 Secure Parameter Selection
Specifying an LWE or a Ring-LWE scheme for encryption requires specifying a ring, 𝑅, of a given
dimension, 𝑛, along with a ciphertext modulus 𝑞, and a choice for the error distribution and a choice for
a secret distribution.
Ring. In practice, we take the ring 𝑅 to be a 2-power cyclotomic ring 𝑅 = 𝑍[𝑥]/(𝑥 t + 1), where 𝑛 is a
power of 2, because for these rings there are no known attacks better than attacks on the LWE problem.
Error distribution. The error is usually chosen from a Discrete Gaussian distribution with width 𝜎 =
 8/√2𝜋. Selecting the error according to a Discrete Gaussian distribution is motivated by theoretical
security reductions proved in [LPR13]. However, those theoretical guarantees do not apply to fixed small
error widths such as 𝜎 = 8/√2𝜋, and would instead require that the error width grow with the square
root of the dimension of the lattice, √𝑛 . None of the known attacks appear to take advantage of the
shape of the error distribution, only the width; however, the analysis of the security levels given below
relies on running time estimates which assume that the shape of the error distribution is Discrete
Gaussian. For that reason we continue to assume that the error is chosen from a Discrete Gaussian
distribution of fixed small width. The width is chosen to be small for practical performance reasons, and
is justified by the concrete running times of known attacks with those error widths. However, over time
if attacks improve or new attacks are found, the width of the error may need to be increased in practice.
Secret key. For efficiency reasons, in practice we often choose the secret from a non-uniform
distribution, such as the ternary distribution, which means to select uniformly from {−1,0,1}. In the
recommended parameters given below, we will present tables for three choices of secret-distribution:
{uniform, error, and ternary}. We will not present tables for sparse secrets because we do not suggest
standardizing the case of sparse secret due to significantly better known attacks.
Number of samples. For most of the attacks listed in the tables below, it is assumed that a certain
number of samples are used in the attack. From an RLWE ciphertext, we can obtain 𝑛 log Y 𝑞 LWE
samples, where T is the bit-decomposition modulus.
Sampling Methods. We restrict to the case where 𝑅 = 𝑍[𝑥]/(𝑥 t + 1), where 𝑛 is a power of 2. In this
case, the Discrete Gaussian distribution on 𝑅 can be generated as
                                                  t‚0

                                             𝑒 = ® 𝑒3 𝑥 3 ,
                                                   3¯M
where each 𝑒3 follows a discrete Gaussian distribution over the integers. Therefore, it suffices to sample
from a discrete Gaussian distribution over the integers of width 𝑠 > 0, which we denote by 𝐷°,± .

There are several known methods to sample from 𝐷°,± , including rejection sampling, inversion sampling,
Discrete Zuggurat, Bernoulli-type, Knuth-Yao and Von Neumann-type. For efficiency, we recommend the
Von Neumann-type sampling method introduced by Karney in [Kar16].

Constant-time sampling. In the aforementioned sampling methods, the time it takes to generate one
sample could leak information about the actual sample. Therefore, it is important that the entire error-
sampling process is constant-time. To achieve this, one possible method is to fix some upper bound 𝑇 >
 0 such that sampling all the 𝑛 coordinates 𝑒3 sequentially without interruption takes time less than 𝑇
time with overwhelming probability. Then after these samples are generated, using time 𝑡, we wait for
(𝑇 − 𝑡) time units, so that the entire error-generating time always takes time 𝑇. In this way, the total
time does not reveal information about the generated error polynomial.
Ring-LWE security for other rings. As noted above, in practice in the application of homomorphic
encryption, we use error distributions of small width. When using error distributions with small width
and considering other rings besides the 2-power cyclotomic rings, there are better known attacks on the
RLWE problem. These attacks and examples of weak rings were first given in [ELOS15] and [CLS15], and
were subsequently improved in [CIV16a], [CIV16b], and [CLS16]. Because rings can be weak with respect
to these attacks in many different ways depending on their geometry, and we don’t have uniform ways
to check for such weakness yet, we do not recommend using non-cyclotomic rings for cryptography. For
general cyclotomic rings (which are not 2-power cyclotomics), there is more research to be done: for
prime cyclotomics an efficient concrete attack on search RLWE was given in [CLS15] when q is the
ramified prime, and an efficient attack on the decision RLWE problem was given for other choices of q.
There are also strong incentives to use 2-power cyclotomic rings for performance reasons, so unless
there are better attacks it makes sense to standardize those anyway.
                                TABLES of RECOMMENDED PARAMETERS
In practice, in order to implement homomorphic encryption for a particular application or task, the
application will have to select a dimension 𝑛, and a ciphertext modulus 𝑞, (along with a plaintext
modulus and a choice of encoding which are not discussed here). For that reason, we give pairs of (𝑛, 𝑞)
which achieve different security levels for each 𝑛. In other words, given 𝑛, the table below recommends
a value of 𝑞 which will achieve a given level of security (e.g. 128 bits) for the given error width 𝜎 ≈ 3.2.
We have the following tables for 3 different security levels, 128-bit, 192-bit, and 256-bit security, where
the secret follows the uniform, error, and ternary distributions. For applications, we give values of 𝑛
from 𝑛 = 2K where 𝑘 = 10, … ,15. We note that we used commit (560525) of the lwe-estimator of
[APS15], which the authors continue to develop and improve. The tables give estimated running times
(in bits) for the three attacks described in Section 5.1: uSVP, dec (decoding attack), and dual.
We also consider two cost models used by the estimator, namely BKZ.sieve and BKZ.ADPS16.
Table 1: Cost model = BKZ.sieve

 distribution   n               security       logq            uSVP           dec             dual
                                level
 uniform        1024            128            29              131.2          145.9           161.0
                                192            21              192.5          225.3           247.2
                                256            16              265.8          332.6           356.7
                2048            128            56              129.8          137.9           148.2
                                192            39              197.6          217.5           233.7
                                256            31              258.6          294.3           314.5
                4096            128            111             128.2          132.0           139.5
                                192            77              194.7          205.5           216.4
                                256            60              260.4          280.4           295.1
                8192            128            220             128.5          130.1           136.3
                                192            154             192.2          197.5           205.3
                                256            120             256.5          267.3           277.5
                16384           128            440             128.1          129.0           133.9
                                192            307             192.1          194.7           201.0
                                256            239             256.6          261.6           269.3
                32768           128            880             128.8          129.1           133.6
                                192            612             193.0          193.9           198.2
                                256            478             256.4          258.8           265.1




 distribution   n               security       logq            uSVP           dec             dual
                                level
 error          1024            128            29              131.2          145.9           141.8
                                192            21              192.5          225.3           210.2
                                256            16              265.8          332.6           300.5
                2048            128            56              129.8          137.9           135.7
                                192            39              197.6          217.5           209.6
                              256           31         258.6   294.3   280.3
                4096          128           111        128.2   132.0   131.4
                              192           77         194.7   205.5   201.5
                              256           60         260.4   280.4   270.1
                8192          128           220        128.5   130.1   130.1
                              192           154        192.2   197.5   196.9
                              256           120        256.5   267.3   263.8
                16384         128           440        128.1   129.3   130.2
                              192           307        192.1   194.7   196.2
                              256           239        256.6   261.6   264.5
                32768         128           883        128.5   128.8   130.0
                              192           613        192.7   193.6   193.4
                              256           478        256.4   258.8   257.9


 distribution   n             security      logq       uSVP    dec     dual
                              level
 (-1, 1)        1024          128           27         131.6   160.2   138.7
                              192           19         193.0   259.5   207.7
                              256           14         265.6   406.4   293.8
                2048          128           54         129.7   144.4   134.2
                              192           37         197.5   233.0   207.8
                              256           29         259.1   321.7   273.5
                4096          128           109        128.1   134.9   129.9
                              192           75         194.7   212.2   198.5
                              256           58         260.4   292.6   270.1
                8192          128           218        128.5   131.5   129.2
                              192           152        192.2   200.4   194.6
                              256           118        256.7   273.0   260.6
                16384         128           438        128.1   129.9   129.0
                              192           305        192.1   196.2   193.2
                              256           237        256.9   264.2   259.8
                32768         128           881        128.5   129.1   128.5
                              192           611        192.7   194.2   193.7
                              256           476        256.4   260.2   258.2


Table 2: Cost model = BKZ.ADPS16, mode = “classical”

 distribution   n             security      logq       uSVP    dec     dual
                              level
 uniform        1024          128           24         133.4   160.1   175.8
                              192           18         200.9   254.3   273.0
                              256           15         256.1   340.3   360.3
                2048          128           46         131.1   146.3   157.8
                              192           35         192.7   221.1   236.8
                              256           28         260.5   308.3   329.1
                4096          128           90         129.9   138.1   146.5
                              192           68         192.7   208.1   219.8
                       256        55     256.1   282.1   297.1
               8192    128        179    128.5   132.3   138.8
                       192        134    192.1   200.9   209.2
                       256        108    257.0   271.4   282.3
               16384   128        355    128.5   130.2   135.3
                       192        265    193.0   197.4   204.0
                       256        215    256.1   263.1   271.1
               32768   128        708    128.5   129.1   132.1
                       192        529    192.7   194.5   199.6
                       256        428    256.1   259.6   266.1


distribution   n       security   logq   uSVP    dec     dual
                       level
error          1024    128        24     133.4   160.1   150.5
                       192        18     200.9   254.3   228.9
                       256        15     256.1   340.3   302.3
               2048    128        46     131.1   146.3   141.0
                       192        35     192.7   221.1   208.8
                       256        28     260.5   308.3   289.8
               4096    128        90     129.9   138.1   136.9
                       192        68     192.7   208.1   200.3
                       256        55     256.1   282.1   268.9
               8192    128        179    128.5   132.3   131.4
                       192        134    192.1   200.9   199.4
                       256        108    257.0   271.4   266.9
               16384   128        355    128.5   130.2   132.0
                       192        265    193.0   197.4   199.1
                       256        215    256.1   263.1   266.3
               32768   128        708    128.5   129.1   131.1
                       192        529    192.7   194.5   193.6
                       256        428    256.1   259.6   261.3


distribution   n       security   logq   uSVP    dec     dual
                       level
(-1, 1)        1024    128        22     134.3   184.0   149.9
                       192        16     200.9   306.7   227.5
                       256        13     256.1   428.6   296.4
               2048    128        44     131.4   156.5   139.3
                       192        33     193.0   241.2   206.2
                       256        26     260.5   344.7   280.0
               4096    128        88     129.9   143.1   134.6
                       192        66     192.7   217.4   199.7
                       256        53     256.7   297.3   269.5
               8192    128        177    128.5   134.3   130.2
                       192        132    192.1   205.0   196.5
                       256        106    257.0   278.5   263.1
                16384         128          353            128.5         131.4         129.9
                              192          264            192.1         198.3         194.2
                              256          213            256.1         266.6         260.5
                32768         128          706            128.5         129.6         129.1
                              192          527            192.7         195.6         194.2
                              256          426            256.1         261.3         261.6



Post-quantum security. The BKZ.qsieve model assumes access to a quantum computer and gives lower
estimates than BKZ.sieve. In what follows, we give tables of recommended (“Post-quantum”)
parameters which achieve the desired levels of security against a quantum computer. We also present
tables computed using the ``quantum” mode of the BKZ.ADPS16 model, which contain more
conservative parameters.


Table 3: Cost model = BKZ.qsieve

 distribution   n           security     logq         uSVP                 dec          dual
                            level
 uniform        1024        128          27           132.2                149.3        164.5
                            192          19           199.3                241.6        261.6
                            256          15           262.9                341.1        360.8
                2048        128          53           128.1                137.6        147.6
                            192          37           193.6                215.8        231.4
                            256          29           257.2                297.9        316.6
                4096        128          103          129.1                134.2        141.7
                            192          72           193.8                206.2        217.2
                            256          56           259.2                281.9        296.5
                8192        128          206          128.2                130.7        136.6
                            192          143          192.9                199.3        207.3
                            256          111          258.4                270.8        280.7
                16384       128          413          128.2                129.0        132.7
                            192          286          192.1                195.3        201.4
                            256          222          257.2                263.1        270.6
                32768       128          829          128.1                128.4        130.8
                            192          573          192.0                193.3        197.5
                            256          445          256.1                259.0        265.2


 distribution   n             security     logq           uSVP          dec           dual
                              level
 error          1024          128          27             132.2         149.3         144.5
                              192          19             199.3         241.6         224.0
                              256          15             262.9         341.1         302.3
                2048          128          53             128.1         137.6         134.8
                              192          37             193.6         215.8         206.7
                              256          29             257.2         297.9         281.4
                4096        128          103         129.1   134.2   133.1
                            192          72          193.8   206.2   201.8
                            256          56          259.2   281.9   270.4
                8192        128          206         128.2   130.7   130.1
                            192          143         192.9   199.3   198.5
                            256          111         258.4   270.8   266.6
                16384       128          413         128.2   129.0   130.1
                            192          286         192.1   195.3   196.6
                            256          222         257.2   263.1   265.8
                32768       128          829         128.1   128.4   129.8
                            192          573         192.0   193.3   192.8
                            256          445         256.1   259.0   260.4


 distribution   n           security     logq        uSVP    dec     dual
                            level
 (-1, 1)        1024        128          25          132.6   165.5   142.3
                            192          17          199.9   284.1   222.2
                            256          13          262.6   423.1   296.6
                2048        128          51          128.6   144.3   133.4
                            192          35          193.5   231.9   205.2
                            256          27          257.1   327.8   274.4
                4096        128          101         129.6   137.4   131.5
                            192          70          193.7   213.6   198.8
                            256          54          259.7   295.2   270.6
                8192        128          202         129.8   130.7   128.0
                            192          141         192.9   202.5   196.1
                            256          109         258.3   276.6   263.1
                16384       128          411         128.2   129.5   129.0
                            192          284         192.0   196.8   193.7
                            256          220         257.2   265.8   260.7
                32768       128          827         128.1   128.7   128.4
                            192          571         192.0   194.1   193.1
                            256          443         256.1   260.4   260.4


Table 4: Cost model = BKZ.ADPS16, mode = “quantum”

 distribution   n           security     logq        uSVP    dec     dual
                            level
 uniform        1024        128          23          128.8   157.7   172.1
                            192          17          196.6   257.2   273.2
                            256          13          280.1   398.5   404.5
                2048        128          43          131.4   148.2   159.4
                            192          32          197.7   231.7   246.9
                            256          26          260.8   316.4   333.3
                4096        128          84          130.1   139.7   147.6
                            192          63          193.7   211.9   223.3
                            256          51          256.8   286.3   301.4
               8192    128        167    128.5   133.0   139.4
                       192        124    193.7   203.8   212.3
                       256        100    258.4   274.7   285.4
               16384   128        331    128.8   130.9   136.2
                       192        247    192.7   197.4   204.4
                       256        199    257.3   265.5   273.8
               32768   128        661    128.5   129.3   132.4
                       192        493    192.1   194.5   199.8
                       256        398    256.3   260.2   266.4


distribution   n       security   logq   uSVP    dec     dual
                       level
error          1024    128        23     128.8   157.7   147.5
                       192        17     196.6   257.2   228.5
                       256        13     280.1   398.5   332.6
               2048    128        43     131.4   148.2   142.0
                       192        32     197.7   231.7   215.2
                       256        26     260.8   316.4   285.7
               4096    128        84     130.1   139.7   137.8
                       192        63     193.7   211.9   203.0
                       256        51     256.8   286.3   271.6
               8192    128        167    128.5   133.0   132.0
                       192        124    193.7   203.8   201.9
                       256        100    258.4   274.7   269.5
               16384   128        331    128.8   130.9   132.5
                       192        247    192.7   197.4   199.5
                       256        199    257.3   265.5   269.0
               32768   128        661    128.5   129.3   131.4
                       192        493    192.1   194.5   193.7
                       256        398    256.3   260.2   261.6




distribution   n       security   logq   uSVP    dec     dual
                       level
(-1, 1)        1024    128        21     129.6   182.8   146.4
                       192        15     197.2   315.3   227.7
                       256        11     277.7   526.3   335.2
               2048    128        41     131.7   159.4   140.5
                       192        30     198.0   255.5   213.6
                       256        24     260.2   357.1   290.4
               4096    128        82     130.1   144.8   135.4
                       192        61     193.7   222.0   203.0
                       256        49     257.3   303.3   269.0
               8192    128        165    128.8   135.4   130.9
                       192        122    193.7   208.6   198.0
                       256        98     258.4   282.4   265.5
                16384          128            329            128.8          132.0          130.6
                               192            245            192.7          199.8          195.3
                               256            197            257.3          269.5          262.6
                32768          128            659            128.5          129.8          129.1
                               192            491            192.1          195.6          194.2
                               256            396            256.3          261.8          262.1


Appendix A

Organizers

 Kristin Lauter                                      klauter@microsoft.com
 Vinod Vaikuntanathan                                vinod.nathan@gmail.com



Contributors

 Martin Albrecht                                     martinralbrecht@googlemail.com
 Melissa Chase                                       melissac@microsoft.com
 Hao Chen                                            haoche@microsoft.com
 Jintai Ding                                         jintai.ding@gmail.com
 Shafi Goldwasser                                    shafi@theory.csail.mit.edu
 Sergey Gorbunov                                     sgorbunov100@gmail.com
 Jeffrey Hoffstein                                   hoffsteinjeffrey@gmail.com
 Satya Lokam                                         Satya.Lokam@microsoft.com
 Daniele Micciancio                                  daniele@cs.ucsd.edu
 Dustin Moody                                        dustin.moody@nist.gov
 Travis Morrison                                     txm950@psu.edu
 Amit Sahai                                          amitsahai@gmail.com


References

[Alb17] Albrecht, M. R. (2017). On dual lattice attacks against small-secret LWE and parameter choices in
HElib and SEAL. In J. Coron & J. B. Nielsen (Eds.), EUROCRYPT 2017, part ii (Vol. 10211, pp. 103–129).
Springer, Heidelberg.

[AFG14] Martin R. Albrecht, Robert Fitzpatrick, and Florian Gopfert: On the Efficacy of Solving
LWE by Reduction to Unique-SVP. In Hyang-Sook Lee and Dong-Guk Han, editors, ICISC 13,
volume 8565 of LNCS, pages 293-310. Springer, November 2014.
[AGVW17] Albrecht, M. R., Göpfert, F., Virdia, F., & Wunderer, T. (2017). Revisiting the expected cost of
solving uSVP and applications to LWE. In T. Takagi & T. Peyrin (Eds.), ASIACRYPT 2017, part i (Vol. 10624,
pp. 297–322). Springer, Heidelberg.

[APS15] Martin R. Albrecht, Rachel Player and Sam Scott. On the concrete hardness of Learning with
Errors. Journal of Mathematical Cryptology. Volume 9, Issue 3, Pages 169–203, ISSN (Online) 1862-2984,
October 2015.

[ADPS16] Alkim, E., Ducas, L., Pöppelmann, T., & Schwabe, P. (2016). Post-quantum key exchange - A
new hope. In T. Holz & S. Savage (Eds.), 25th USENIX security symposium, USENIX security 16 (pp. 327–
343). USENIX Association. Retrieved from
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity16/technical-sessions/presentation/alkim

[AP14] Alperin-Sheriff, J., Peikert, C.: Faster bootstrapping with polynomial error. In: Garay, J.A.,
Gennaro, R. (eds.) CRYPTO 2014. LNCS, vol. 8616, pp. 297–314.

[Bab86] László Babai: On Lovász’ lattice reduction and the nearest lattice point problem, Combinatorica,
6(1):1-3, 1986.

[BDGL16] Becker, A., Ducas, L., Gama, N., & Laarhoven, T. (2016). New directions in nearest neighbor
searching with applications to lattice sieving. In R. Krauthgamer (Ed.), 27th soda (pp. 10–24). ACM-SIAM.
https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611974331.ch2

[BGV12]: Zvika Brakerski, Craig Gentry, Vinod Vaikuntanathan. (Leveled) fully homomorphic encryption
without bootstrapping. In ITCS '12 Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science
Conference. Pages 309-325.

[B12] Zvika Brakerski. Fully Homomorphic Encryption without Modulus Switching from Classical
GapSVP, In CRYPTO 2012. Pages 868 – 886.

[CIV16a] W. Castryck, I. Iliashenko, F. Vercauteren, Provably weak instances of ring-lwe revisited. In:
Eurocrypt 2016. vol. 9665, pp. 147–167. Springer (2016)

[CIV16b] W. Castryck, I. Iliashenko, F. Vercauteren, On error distributions in ring-based LWE. LMS Journal
of Computation and Mathematics 19(A), 130–145 (2016) 7.

[Che13 ] Chen, Y. (2013). Réduction de réseau et sécurité concrète du chiffrement complètement
homomorphe (PhD thesis). Paris 7.

[CLS15] Hao Chen, Kristin Lauter, Katherine E. Stange, Attacks on the Search RLWE Problem with Small
Errors, SIAM J. Appl. Algebra Geometry, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Vol. 1, pp. 665–
682. (2017) https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/971

[CLS16] Hao Chen, Kristin Lauter, Katherine E. Stange. Security Considerations for Galois Non-dual RLWE
Families, SAC 2016: Selected Areas in Cryptography – SAC 2016 Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol.
10532. Springer pp 443-462.
[CN11] Y. Chen, P.Q. Nguyen. BKZ 2.0: Better Lattice Security Estimates. In: Lee D.H., Wang X. (eds)
Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2011. ASIACRYPT 2011. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
7073. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

[CGGI16] Chillotti, I., Gama, N., Georgieva, M., Izabachène, M.: Faster fully homomorphic encryption:
bootstrapping in less than 0.1 seconds. In: Cheon, J.H., Takagi, T. (eds.) ASIACRYPT 2016. LNCS, vol.
10031, pp. 3–33.

[CS16] Ana Costache, Nigel P. Smart, Which Ring Based Somewhat Homomorphic Encryption Scheme is
Best? Topics in Cryptology - CT-RSA 2016, LNCS, volume 9610, Pages 325-340.

[DM15] Ducas, L., Micciancio, D.: FHEW: bootstrapping homomorphic encryption in less than a second.
In: Oswald, E., Fischlin, M. (eds.) EUROCRYPT 2015. LNCS, vol. 9056, pp. 617–640.

[ELOS15] Yara Elias, Kristin Lauter, Ekin Ozman, Katherine E. Stange, Provably weak instances of Ring-
LWE, CRYPTO 2015
[FV12] J. Fan and F. Vercauteren. Somewhat practical fully homomorphic encryption. Cryptology ePrint
Archive, Report 2012/144, 2012. http://eprint.iacr.org/2012/144.pdf

[GINX16] Gama, N., Izabachène, M., Nguyen, P.Q., Xie, X.: Structural lattice reduction: generalized worst-
case to average-case reductions. In: EUROCRYPT 2016, ePrint Archive, 2014/283


[GSW] C. Gentry, A. Sahai, and B. Waters. Homomorphic Encryption from Learning with Errors:
Conceptually-Simpler, Asymptotically-Faster, Attribute-Based. In CRYPTO 2013 (Springer).

[Kar16] C.F.F. Karney, Sampling Exactly from the Normal Distribution. ACM Transactions on Mathematical
Software, 42, Article No. 3.

[KL15] Miran Kim and Kristin Lauter, Private Genome Analysis through Homomorphic Encryption,
BioMedCentral Journal of Medical Informatics and Decision Making 2015 15 (Suppl 5):S3.

[Laa15] Laarhoven, T. (2015). Search problems in cryptography: From fingerprinting to lattice sieving
(PhD thesis). Eindhoven University of Technology.

[LMvP13] Laarhoven T., Mosca M., van de Pol J. (2013) Solving the Shortest Vector Problem in Lattices
Faster Using Quantum Search. In: Gaborit P. (eds) Post-Quantum Cryptography. PQCrypto 2013. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol 7932. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

[LP11] Richard Lindner and Chris Peikert: Better key sizes (and attacks) for LWE-based encryption. In
Topics in Cryptology - CT-RSA 2011 - The Cryptographers' Track at the RSA Conference 2011, Aggelos
Kiayias, Editor, volume 6558 of LNCS, pages 319—339.
[LN13] Liu, M., & Nguyen, P. Q. (2013). Solving BDD by enumeration: An update. In E. Dawson (Ed.), CT-
rsa 2013 (Vol. 7779, pp. 293–309). Springer, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-36095-4_19

[LTV] A. Lopez-Alt, E. Tromer, and V. Vaikuntanathan. On-the-ﬂy multiparty computation on the cloud
via multikey fully homomorphic encryption. In STOC, pages 1219–1234, 2012.
[LPR13] Vadim Lyubashevsky, Chris Peikert, and Oded Regev : On Ideal Lattices and Learning with Errors
over Rings. Journal of the ACM (JACM), Volume 60, Issue 6, November 2013, Article No. 43.

[MR09] Micciancio, D., & Regev, O. (2009). Lattice-based cryptography. In D. J. Bernstein, J. Buchmann,
& E. Dahmen (Eds.), Post-quantum cryptography (pp. 147–191). Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer,
Heidelberg.

[NTRU] J. Hoﬀstein, J. Pipher, and J. H. Silverman. NTRU: A ring-based public key cryptosystem. In J.
Buhler, editor, ANTS, volume 1423 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 267–288. Springer,
1998.
[YASHE] Joppe W. Bos, Kristin Lauter, Jake Loftus, and Michael Naehrig. Improved Security for a Ring-
Based Fully Homomorphic Encryption Scheme, in IMA CC 2013. http://eprint.iacr.org/2013/075.pdf
Software references for 7 Homomorphic Encryption libraries:
[SEAL] http://sealcrypto.org
[HElib] https://github.com/shaih/HElib
[NFLlib] https://github.com/CryptoExperts/FV-NFLlib
[Palisade] https://git.njit.edu/groups/palisade
[cuHE] https://github.com/vernamlab/cuHE
[HEAAN] https://github.com/kimandrik/HEAAN
[TFHE] https://tfhe.github.io/tfhe/
